Microservices Overview

# Objective

This Learning Lab should give you a basic understanding of microservices, containers, and cloud native applications.

Completion time: 30 minutes

# Prerequisites

Describe any Prerequisites here

# Audience

* DevOps engineers
* Application developers

# Considerations of Cloud Native applications

* 12 Factor app
I. Codebase: One codebase tracked in revision control, many deploys
II. Dependencies: Explicitly declare and isolate dependencies
III. Config: Store config in the environment
IV. Backing services: Treat backing services as attached resources
V. Build, release, run: Strictly separate build and run stages
VI. Processes
Execute the app as one or more stateless processes
VII. Port binding: Export services via port binding
VIII. Concurrency: Scale out via the process model
IX. Disposability: Maximize robustness with fast startup and graceful shutdown
X. Dev/prod parity: Keep development, staging, and production as similar as possible
XI. Logs: Treat logs as event streams
XII. Admin processes: Run admin/management tasks as one-off processes

# What are microservices?

Microservices is a style of architecting an application.  Generally microservices are thought of as discrete functions in your application exposed by an API.  Note that while microservices and containers are used a lot together, you don't necessarily have to have a microservices application based on container technology.  

# What is a container?

Containers have a long legacy in computing that stretch back to the mid-1970s.  However, recently Docker has come to the fore and popularized containers by making it really easy to use containers.  

There is some confusion about containers being something like virtualization, which at a high level generalization is reasonable.  However, the big difference comes in a few characteristics of containers.

* Containers may life on bare metal OR in a virtualized OS
* Containers, at least the Docker model, are "immutable," meaning that they cannot be changed.  In fact, they are versioned, similar to source control.
* Applications in containers typically run as `root`

# How microservices and containers help

The primary benefit of a microservices approach is the enable a team to deploy application logic in a granular way.  Take an example scenario where I have a User service and a Photos service.  In a traditional monolithic architecture, and I wanted to add a new feature to the Photos service, perhaps adding Geo Tagging, then I would need to re-deploy the entire application.  In a microservices architecture, I would make updates to my Photos service, and just deploy that service.  

If you use containers as part of your microservices architecture, you also reap the benefit that all of your dependencies for the Photos services are "embedded" within the container.  A subtle benefit, although important, is that you can then use different languages for different parts of your application.  This can help optimize based not only on technology superiority for a given task, but also enables you to have team members who are specialists in different languages and stacks.
