# What are microservices?

Microservices is a style of architecting an application.  Generally microservices are thought of as discrete functions in your application exposed by an API.  Note that while microservices and containers are used a lot together, you don't necessarily have to have a microservices application based on container technology.  In many ways, microservices is more a mentality, than a specific technology decision.  Having said that, it's quite likely that if you architect in a microservices manner, it may lead to using containers.

# What is a container?

Containers have a long legacy in computing that stretch back to the mid-1970s.  However, recently Docker has come to the fore and popularized containers by making it really easy to use containers.  

There is some confusion about containers being something like virtualization, which at a high level generalization is reasonable.  However, the big difference comes in a few characteristics of containers.

* Containers may live on bare metal OR in a virtualized OS
* Containers, at least the Docker model, are "immutable," meaning that they cannot be changed.  In fact, they are versioned, similar to source control.
* Applications in containers typically run as `root`

# How microservices and containers help

The primary benefit of a microservices approach is the enable a team to deploy application logic in a granular way.  Take an example scenario where I have a User service and a Photos service.  In a traditional monolithic architecture, and I wanted to add a new feature to the Photos service, perhaps adding Geo Tagging, then I would need to re-deploy the entire application.  In a microservices architecture, I would make updates to my Photos service, and just deploy that service.  

If you use containers as part of your microservices architecture, you also reap the benefit that all of your dependencies for the Photos services are "embedded" within the container.  A subtle benefit, although important, is that you can then use different languages for different parts of your application.  This can help optimize based not only on technology superiority for a given task, but also enables you to have team members who are specialists in different languages and stacks.

These so-called container stacks enable you to take an application that's been packaged as a container, and launch it into a cluster and Mesos/Marathon will take care of the scaling and making sure it's running.

# Managing a plethora of containers

Once you've decided that you want to at least experiment with a microservices architecture, you will quickly find a vast array of platforms on which you can deploy your containers in the public and private cloud world.  If you are considering a private cloud model, you will probably come across a few platforms: Docker Swarm, Mesos, Marathon, and Kubernetes.  Each of these technologies enable you to manage a cluster of containers and resources.  They're all quite impressive in packaging the data center capabilities of public cloud services like Google and Twitter, but available for you to take into your data center.

# How Cisco Shipped and Mantl help you with container deployments

[Cisco Shipped](https://ciscoshipped.io) and [Mantl.io](https://mantl.io) are Cisco's take on how to manage a container infrastructure for the next generation of Cloud Native applications.  Mantl is an open source, pre-integrated and Cisco-validated container stack that packages Mesos, Marathon, Kubernetes and several other components into a straightforward installation process.  Once you have a Mantl cluster installed in your data center or on a public cloud, you can immediately deploy and manage containers using Marathon or Kubernetes.  

Cisco Shipped builds upon the Mantl foundation to provide a continuous integration / continuous deployment pipeline for a developer or team of developers.  Shipped provides a consistent local development environment using popular tools like Docker and Vagrant to mimic the Shipped cloud platform.  Using Shipped, you can take your code hosted in GitHub, and deploy it to a production environment in minutes.

# Conclusion

We've only scratched the surface of the new era of Cloud Native application development.  You should now have a better understanding of cloud application architecture, and some of the considerations to keep in mind when exploring the new world of microservices and containers.
